GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: a big win for
conservatives at the polls.
Republican
Matt Bevin easily takes the
Kentucky governor's race and
Ohio says no to legalizing pot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday, looking back at the
assassination of Israeli
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin
twenty years later -- how the
event still shapes the politics
of the Middle East.
GWEN IFILL: And actor Jeff
Daniels on bringing theater to
his hometown in rural Michigan.
JEFF DANIELS, Actor/Playwright:
You have to get them to not just
go to the plays that
have a happy ending. Is it a
comedy? OK, it's not a comedy.
When's the next comedy? I will
come to that. And you have to
get those people to take a
chance once in awhile.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's growing
talk tonight that a bomb brought
down that Russian airliner
over Egypt's Sinai Peninsula.
The Metrojet passenger plane
broke up and crashed Saturday
on a flight from Sharm el-Sheikh
to Saint Petersburg, killing all
224 people on board.
Now the Associated Press and
others say U.S. intelligence
believes Islamic State militants
may have planted the bomb.
That follows similar reports out
of Cairo and London, as we hear
from Alex Thomson of
Independent Television News.
ALEX THOMSON: After days of
inevitable speculation based
upon not much, today, something
altogether
more substantial appears
to be building.
Early this afternoon, Egyptian
media reports indicated the
plane had suffered an explosion
in one engine. They sourced this
to black box flight recorder
investigations, which
continue, then the statement
from Downing Street that, as
more information has come
to light -- quote -- "We have
become concerned that the plane
may well have been brought
down by an explosive device."
PATRICK MCLOUGHLIN, British
Transportation Minister: As a
precautionary measure, we have
decided that flights due to
leave Sharm el-Sheikh this
evening for the U.K. will be
delayed.
And that will allow us time to
ensure that the right security
measures are in place for
flights.
ALEX THOMSON: Extra consular
staff has also been sent to
Sharm's airport to assist
British
holiday makers. There are
currently around 15,000 tourists
in the resort from Britain.
Downing Street said it
recognizes these moves will
cause some anxiety, but its
travel advice
for Sharm remains unchanged.
Essentially, The Foreign Office
advises Red Sea resorts
are fine, but many other areas,
Sinai in particular, where the
Russian plane came down, should
be considered off-limits.
GWEN IFILL: At least 36 people
died in a cargo plane crash in
South Sudan today. The
Russian-built
plane went down shortly after
taking off from the capital,
Juba, headed for a region of
oil fields. Wreckage was strewn
across a wide area along the
banks of the Nile River. Early
indications were that security
officials may have allowed too
many people on board.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Malaysia,
disputes over China's claims in
the South China Sea dominated
a meeting of U.S. and Asian
defense ministers. The gathering
ended without a public
statement,
when China insisted there be no
mention of territorial disputes.
Later, U.S. Defense Secretary
Ash Carter played down the
tensions, but acknowledged
China's
neighbors are worried.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: I had no expectation
that everyone would agree on
the South China Sea or any other
issue. That's the reason for
this forum, is to discuss these
issues, and that reflects, I,
think the level of concern that
was reflected in the
conversation
about activities in
the South China Sea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary Carter
also defended U.S. Navy patrols
in the contested waters.
To underscore the point, he will
be on the U.S. aircraft carrier
Theodore Roosevelt as
it transits the South
China Sea on Thursday.
GWEN IFILL: Canada's new prime
minister, Justin Trudeau, was
sworn in today. He took office
during a ceremony in Ottawa,
becoming, at the age of 43, the
country's second youngest
prime minister ever. Trudeau
succeeds Conservative Stephen
Harper.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the U.S.
presidential race, the filing
period opened for New
Hampshire's
first-in-the-nation primary in
February. Donald Trump was the
first major candidate on the
Republican side to submit his
papers and pay the $1,000 filing
fee. Former Maryland Governor
Martin O'Malley registered on
the Democratic side. He's been a
distant also-ran, but he
said voters are just starting
to focus on the election.
GWEN IFILL: The chair of the
Federal Reserve is suggesting
again that short-term interest
rates could rise before year's
end. Speaking at a House
committee hearing today, Janet
Yellen said the Fed has yet to
make a final decision. She told
lawmakers it all depends
on whether the economy is still
performing well, as well as
other key factors.
JANET YELLEN, Federal Reserve
Chair: If the incoming
information supports that
expectation,
then our statement indicates
that December would be a live
possibility, but, importantly,
that we have made no
decision about it.
GWEN IFILL: Separately, Yellen
warned that the nation's biggest
banks still aren't doing
enough to guard against
serious financial shocks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The latest look
at Europe's economy shows it's
growing only modestly.
A closely-watched monthly
survey, out today, found that
economic activity across the
Eurozone
isn't enough to make a dent in
unemployment. That could push
the European Central Bank
to increase its
stimulus efforts.
GWEN IFILL: Volkswagen stock
plummeted nearly 10 percent in
European trading today after
a new revelation. The company
acknowledged Tuesday it
understated dioxide emissions
for
some 800,000 cars, most
of them in Europe.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost 50
points to close below 17870.
The Nasdaq fell two points,
and the S&P 500 slid seven.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour": what yesterday's
election results say about
voter sentiment; why more
middle-aged white Americans are
dying; capturing harmful methane
emissions, and much more.
GWEN IFILL: From a significant
win in a key governor's race to
a number of ballot initiatives,
conservatives had a big day
at the polls yesterday.
It was one of the night's
headline issues. Supporters
hoped Ohio would be the first
Midwestern
state to legalize marijuana for
medical and recreational use.
But by nearly 2-1, voters
gave that a resounding no. The
same conservative wave cost
Kentucky Democrats their
longtime
hold on the governor's mansion.
Attorney General Jack Conway
lost to Republican Matt Bevin,
who opposed the federal health
care law and gay marriage.
MATT BEVIN (R), Kentucky
Governor-Elect: I'm grateful
that you all went to the ballot
box.
And those that are watching, and
those that have collectively
decided that we want a fresh
start, that we want to turn the
page, this is your Kentucky.
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile, in
Houston, an ordinance to curb
discrimination against gays and
transgender
people went down to defeat.
Outgoing Mayor Annise Parker,
the nation's only lesbian mayor,
lamented the outcome.
ANNISE PARKER (D), Mayor of
Houston, Texas: I fear that this
will have stained Houston's
reputation as a tolerant,
welcoming global city. And I
absolutely fear that there will
be a direct economic backlash as
a result of this ordinance going
into defeat.
GWEN IFILL: But the Family
Research Council and other
conservative groups praised the
result. Council President Tony
Perkins called it "a rallying
cry for those tired of seeing
their freedoms trampled in a
politically correct stampede to
redefine marriage and
sexuality."
In San Francisco, it was freedom
to rent that topped the ballot.
Voters handed a victory
to the online site Airbnb, which
was founded in the city by the
bay, refusing to limit
how often home owners
may rent out rooms.
For more on last night's
results, we turn now to Stu
Rothenberg of The
Rothenberg-Gonzales
Political Report, and Molly
Hennessy-Fiske, Houston bureau
chief for The Los Angeles Times.
Stu, the Republicans or
conservative causes had gains on
issues. They had gains on
candidates.
Let's start in Kentucky. How did
Matt Bevin confound the polls?
STUART ROTHENBERG, Editor and
Publisher, The Rothenberg &
Gonzales Political Report: Well,
Gwen, you're right. Almost all
the pollsters got it wrong, and
there are a number of possible
explanations.
To some extent, they always had
Jack Conway, the Democrat,
running in the mid-40s, but
with a two- to five-point lead.
He ended up losing, but he also
got in the mid-40s, just
what they predicted. It could
have been that the undecided
voters swung, swung dramatically
to the Republican.
On the other hand, I think it's
more likely that it was a late
break in cultural issues,
social issues, issues like
Planned Parenthood funding
that's -- that's been a big
issue
-- same-sex marriage, religious
liberty. Cultural issues seem to
take hold.
And, also, there's one other
thing I think you have to
consider. That is, Kentucky has
been moving Republican over the
past few decades. And it is now
reliably Republican in federal
races. State races tend to be
different. The minority party,
the wrong party, can sometimes
win statewide offices.
But in this case, Republicans
did go to the Barack Obama well
again and again, and it
may well be that these
Republicans voters just decided
they couldn't vote for a
Democrat
for governor.
GWEN IFILL: You talk about
trends. There was, obviously, a
trend towards Republicans in
Kentucky. But on social issues
like in Ohio, the marijuana
legalization vote, there have
always been -- we have always
been headed in the other
direction, and Ohio said no
resoundingly.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, in
Ohio, it might have been just
too much, too fast in terms
of recreational marijuana usage.
But it was more than that. It
was the ballot measure itself.
Sometimes, the actual structure
of the measures matter. And in
this case, I think that folks in
Ohio were unhappy that
a select group of growers and
investors were going to get, in
fact, a monopoly on this
in Ohio on marijuana.
And that was a significant
factor. And it's funny. There
are people who supported
legalization
of marijuana who opposed
this initiative.
GWEN IFILL: Because of the
way it was structured.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Because of
the structure of the measure.
GWEN IFILL: You know, we don't
pay enough attention to what
happens in statehouses,
but in Virginia last night,
there had been a big push for
Democrats to try to take control
of the statehouse, and
it didn't work out.
STUART ROTHENBERG: It didn't
because the Republicans held
their seats and the Democrats
held their
seats, and so the Republicans
still have a 21-19 advantage in
the Virginia State Senate.
On one level, that's so -- what
else is new? Nothing's new,
really. But this was a bit
of a black eye for the governor,
Terry McAuliffe, known as a
great fund-raiser and a savvy
political
operative, a friend of the
Clintons, all the Clintons. He
could not work his magic and
flip a seat, so that the
Democrats control the Senate.
It doesn't -- I don't think it
fundamentally changes the
dynamic of the politics there.
But it is an embarrassment
for the governor.
GWEN IFILL: Molly
Hennessy-Fiske, how did the
Houston discrimination
ordinance, or
ordinance, how did it
rise and how did it fall?
MOLLY HENNESSY-FISKE, The Los
Angeles Times: Well, it lost
pretty resoundingly 61 to 39
percent.
Both sides had thought that it
was going to be a very close
race. The mayor had championed
it, made it a personal cause of
hers, Mayor Annise Parker. The
city council had already
voted for it and approved it,
and then there was this
protracted legal battle and
political
battle that led to it being
placed on the ballot.
So it was a pretty big victory
for the conservatives who had
petitioned and sued to get it
put
on the ballot, put to a vote,
and now they'd like to have it
all put to rest, but some
folks are still vowing
to fight for it.
GWEN IFILL: Now, let's be clear.
This was an ordinance that would
have prohibited discrimination
against gays and --
LGBT individuals...
MOLLY HENNESSY-FISKE:
That's right.
GWEN IFILL: ... which had passed
in other cities around Texas,
but this became defined
differently.
And let's listen to a little bit
of one ad that we heard. It was
Houston Astros star
Lance Berkman. Let's listen.
LANCE BERKMAN, Houston Astros:
I'm Lance Berkman. I played
professional baseball for 15
years,
but my family is more important.
My wife and I have four
daughters. Proposition 1 would
allow troubled men who claim to
be women to enter women's
bathrooms, showers, and locker
rooms. It's better to prevent
this danger by closing women's
restrooms to men, rather
than waiting for a
crime to happen.
GWEN IFILL: So, Molly, this was
about transgender issues, not
really about anti-discrimination
in the end. It was redefined.
MOLLY HENNESSY-FISKE: Well, it
depends who is talking about it.
I would say both sides would
probably say it's more
complicated than that. This
measure
did end up getting dubbed the
bathroom ordinance, like you
heard in that ad by a former
Houston
Astro. But even the
conservatives who scored a
victory with this said it means
more to
them than that. They felt like
the other thing that was at
issue was religious liberty,
that
if, for instance, a florist was
asked by a same-sex couple to do
the, you know, flowers
for their wedding, that if they
said no, under this ordinance,
they could face penalties
or be sued.
And the pro-ordinance campaign
has said it was about way more
than bathrooms. In fact,
the mayor repeatedly said that
the ordinance didn't
specifically talk about
bathrooms,
and she felt like that was a lot
of fear-mongering and a scare
tactic that spread a lot of
misinformation,
and that today she even said at
a press conference that she felt
like the voters weren't really
voting about what the
ordinance was really about.
GWEN IFILL: But in the end,
that's what redefinition --
redefining things does. But in
the end,
they also were able to appeal to
black churches, for instance, to
take the side against the
ordinance, which you would think
an anti-discrimination ordinance
would be appealing to
African-Americans.
MOLLY HENNESSY-FISKE: That's
right. And I talked to some of
those pastors as the campaign
was going on who were very
upset, not just because of the
ordinance and what it says
and what they feared it might
do, but also because, in the
process of the legal battle,
the city had subpoenaed
some of their sermons.
And they really got their backs
up about that, felt like that
was an infringement on freedom
of religion, and freedom of
speech, and even though the city
backed off, they felt like
they were under attack and they
had to work to lobby against
this.
GWEN IFILL: And there is a
mayoral runoff which is also --
this may get played out against
in Houston.
Stu, it's always possible to
overreach and overinterpret
these from a national point
of view, but I wonder what the
parties, the individual parties
and the wings of those
parties are taking from all
these results yesterday.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, the
Republicans, at least in their
P.R. releases, are saying
something big happened, a string
of Republican victories in
Virginia. They're predicting
that this shows the turnaround,
Virginia's coming back the
Republican column.
I'm hesitant to read very much
outside of Kentucky, the
particular circumstances in
Ohio and Houston, example. Look,
next year, we're going to have a
different kind of election
with a different kind of
electorate, where the election
will be about -- I'm not sure
what it's going to be about, but
it could be about Hillary
Clinton or the Republican
nominee or the Middle
East or health care.
And once we know that, then we
will have a better sense on the
ebb and flow of the campaigns
and the general lay of the
land of the election.
GWEN IFILL: Stu Rothenberg of
the Rothenberg-Gonzales
Political Report, and Molly
Hennessy-Fiske
of The L.A. Times, thank
you both very much.
MOLLY HENNESSY-FISKE: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Death rates in
the United States have declined
steadily for decades. But a
study out this week found a
disturbing reversal in mortality
rates for white Americans
between
the ages of 45 and 54 who do
not hold a college degree.
For that group, the rate of
death has climbed since 1999,
even as rates for people of
different
ages, races and education levels
have continued to fall. The
causes of death driving the
reversal
were suicide, alcohol-related
liver diseases, and prescription
opioids and heroin overdoses.
I'm joined now by one of the
study's authors, Anne Case. She
is a professor of economics
and public affairs at Princeton
University. And by Dante Chinni.
He's a data reporter
and he's director of the
American Communities Project, a
political science and journalism
program at Michigan State
University that uses data to
look at social, political and
cultural divides.
And welcome to you both.
Professor Case, let
me begin with you.
You have said that when you and
your husband, who is Professor
Angus Deaton -- he's the
winner of this year's Nobel
Prize, and he was the co-author
of this study -- that when
you came across these numbers,
you basically stumbled across
this information, and that
he said you practically fell out
of your chairs. It was that
surprising?
ANNE CASE, Princeton University:
It is that surprising.
After so many decades in which
mortality rates fell at 2
percent a year, and the fact
that
in all of the sister countries
that we compare ourselves to,
all the wealthy countries of
Europe and all the
English-speaking countries,
Canada, Australia, New Zealand,
with their
mortality rates also falling at
2 percent a year, to suddenly
see this reversal was
really stunning.
And it has been stunning to all
of the medical people, the
epidemiologists that we have
talked
to as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's already --
Professor Case, it's already
being labeled by some as
despair-related
deaths. What is it particularly
about this -- these mortality --
this mortality rate
that stood out to you?
ANNE CASE: The fact that there
are several parts of this that
are puzzles that we have
to dig into further, the fact
that it's men and women,
mortality rates by suicide, by
drug overdose, by
alcohol-related deaths rising
for all of -- for both men and
women, the
fact that it's not happening in
the African-American community,
it's not happening in the
Hispanic
community, and it's
not happening abroad.
So, all of those things stood
out to us as puzzle pieces that
we have to look into further
to figure out, what are the root
causes of this? We know the
proximate causes, drug overdose,
availability of prescription
opioids. But I think the next
round of research will be
to look at the deeper causes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dante Chinni, how
does this square with what you
have been seeing as you
have looked at the American --
Americans everywhere and as you
think about this cohort we're
talking
about, middle-aged Americans,
45-54, white? What have you
seen?
DANTE CHINNI, American
Communities Project: Well, the
way I look at the country, the
breakdown
we do at the American
Communities Project, is there
are large segments of America
that
are made up of large
chunks of this population.
So, they tend to be rural,
white, not high education
levels, or high school, no
bachelor's
or even a community college
degree. And the places those
populations are heavily based
are the Bible Belt, what we call
evangelical hubs, the
Appalachian America, which is
what
we call working-class country,
and then graying America, which
is kind of more based in the
North and the West, but
populations, again, elderly --
more -- I don't want to say
elderly,
but older people and people
without a lot of college
degrees, overwhelmingly white.
What do we know about those
places? Higher unemployment
rates than the national average,
higher unemployment rates than
other kinds of communities in
the country.
The other thing that really
sticks out about them is, beyond
the unemployment rate, which
can be a little bit deceptive,
there is the work force
participation rate. In these
places,
you're talking about all these
communities I just outlined, 44
percent, 45 percent of
the population not
in the work force.
Now, look, some of that is
probably due to people have
retired or they want to stay at
home. But I think when you
combine that with the higher
unemployment rates in those
areas,
I think what you're really
seeing is, in terms of the
difficulty of finding a way to
make
a living, right?
It's a much -- it's a tougher
life in these places now. I
think a lot of this has to do
with the decline of small
manufacturing in these places.
Tougher rural life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you think
about -- Professor Case, you
think about what's happened in
this
country to the economy over the
last 15 years, we can't, of
course, jump to any conclusions,
but we know jobs -- there's been
a huge change in the job
picture.
We know American manufacturing
has taken a big hit. What sorts
of questions does all
this raise for you?
ANNE CASE: It's -- one of the
questions is why it is the case
that the
employment-to-population
ratio has fallen so
dramatically, especially among
women.
In our surveys, we were able to
look at morbidity, as well as
mortality, so we can actually
find
out how people are, what their
general health is like, what
their mental health is like,
and there's been a doubling in
this 15-year period among people
aged 45-54 who report
that they're unable to work.
So, this used to be the period
of time when people were at
their highest earnings capacity.
And to see these people, upwards
of 10 percent of the white
population, saying that they're
not able to work is
really troubling.
It used to be the case that,
with a high school degree, you
could get a good job, you could
get a job with benefits, you
could get a job that was stable,
that you had job security.
And I think people's narratives
of their own lives had in them
having a job, and the fact
that these jobs are gone and
they're not coming back any time
soon leads people to despair.
And they report themselves in
worse health. They report lower
mental health, a lot more
stress, a lot more distress. And
I think these mortality rates
just reflect that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dante Chinni, I
mean, I -- you're nodding your
head as she's saying all this.
I mean, this does seem to
dovetail with at least the
circumstances that you find in
your
research.
DANTE CHINNI: Yes, absolutely.
I mean, I can't -- I would love
to get the professor's data and
run a geographic analysis
on it to see if we're seeing
these things fall in line with
what I'm expecting. But
this is exactly what
we're talking about.
Look, in a lot of these places,
when you lose a job,
particularly if you're in your
40s,
there's not a lot of places to
go. There's certainly not a lot
of places to go to get
a job where you can earn similar
to what you were earning before.
Maybe the benefits go
away. Maybe the health
insurance goes away.
If you go out to some of these
places, not just rural America,
but there's a category
that we look at call the middle
suburbs, and they're based --
they're overwhelmingly white.
They're primarily based in the
Industrial Midwest, the
Northeast, around Pittsburgh,
Cleveland, Detroit. Milwaukee,
you see some of it.
You have large white
populations. A lot of these were
high school-educated people who
did make a really good living.
They had a good life. Their
parents had a good life.
They had a good life. And all of
a sudden, the rules changed,
right? And the idea that
a high school education was good
enough, it wasn't good enough
anymore. It wasn't good
enough to have the cabin
up north anymore.
And, suddenly, it wasn't good
enough to have a job anymore.
And that's a very hard thing
to deal with. We will see.
Again, we have got to take
another couple cuts at this
data,
right, and see what's there. But
it certainly does fit the
profile.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Well, it's clear that there is
going to be more research. At
least, it looks as if there
is going to be more research
based on what you have done.
Professor Case, thank you very
much for joining us. Professor
Anne Case at Princeton and Dante
Chinni here in Washington,
we appreciate it.
DANTE CHINNI: Thanks.
ANNE CASE: Thanks very much.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
Middle East conflict 20 years
after an Israeli prime
minister's
assassination; and actor Jeff
Daniels trades in the Big Apple
for the Midwest.
But, first, natural gas is often
considered a cleaner fuel than
coal. It emits about half
as much carbon dioxide. But the
main component in natural gas is
another greenhouse gas:
methane.
As special correspondent
Kathleen McCleery explains,
that's why both
environmentalists
and the energy industry are
trying to find ways to capture
leaks from oil and gas
facilities.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: You can't see
it with the naked eye, but
methane gas is escaping into
the air around this well in
Northwestern New Mexico.
MAN: Oh, yes. Yes, boy, it's
just blowing up out of the --
off the side of it here.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: You can see
the methane, along with other
emissions, with the help
of an infrared camera, this one
operated by the environmental
group Earthworks.
WOMAN: There's a lot of leaking
coming from both of those valve
boxes.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Methane is
the primary component of natural
gas. It's also a greenhouse
gas. Like carbon dioxide, it
traps energy in the atmosphere,
and according to the
Environmental
Protection Agency, contributes
to climate change. CO2 is far
more prevalent, but methane
is much more potent.
MANVENDRA DUBEY, Los Alamos
National Laboratory: Methane is
about 25 times more potent a
greenhouse
gas on a 100-year
horizon than CO2.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Los Alamos
atmospheric scientist Manvendra
Dubey was measuring carbon
dioxide, not methane, last year
when NASA released satellite
images, including this
one showing a 2,500-square-mile
hot spot centered over the Four
Corners area, where New Mexico,
Colorado, Utah and Arizona meet.
MANVENDRA DUBEY: They showed
that, over Four Corners, methane
was enhanced. It was the
-- kind of the hottest methane
spot in the whole of continental
U.S.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Now, Dubey
and others are tracking methane
through ground and aerial
investigations aimed at finding
the sources of the hot spot.
Some emissions seep out of
coal beds here in the San Juan
Basin. Some come from
agriculture, including cows.
Winds
allow the gas to pool in the
river basin surrounded by
mountains.
Nationwide, the EPA traces the
largest amount, about 30
percent, to natural gas and
petroleum.
But the industry doesn't
accept that figure yet.
Wally Drangmeister, vice
president of the New Mexico Oil
and Gas Association, wants
the ongoing research to
examine all sources.
WALLY DRANGMEISTER, Vice
President, New Mexico Oil and
Gas Association: There are
natural
outcroppings. There's coal
mining. There's a lot of other
activities, and so we'd really
like to see the science
completed, so that we're not
just the only industry or the
only
source that's getting blamed.
JANE SCHREIBER, New Mexico:
We're in the middle of nowhere,
but, yes, basically, we're kind
of in the middle
of that hot spot.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: At Devil's
Spring Ranch, Don and Jane
Schreiber worry about the
natural
gas wells on their property.
They took us along on a tour in
their retrofitted school
bus when the Earthworks
team visited recently.
BRUCE BAIZEL, Earthworks: If you
see leakage coming on this
camera, there is leakage, and
there's really no argument
about it anymore.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: The
Schreibers' concern goes beyond
climate change to the air
they're
breathing, because other
chemicals like benzene are
emitted along with the methane.
DON SCHREIBER, New Mexico: It's
got to be bad, and now we know
it is, and it's in that
cloud, and it's a very,
very sobering thing.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Companies can
drill here because of a law
called split estate. The
Schreibers own the land above
ground, but the mineral rights
below, in this case owned
by the federal government, can
be leased to oil and gas
companies.
More than 120 wells dot the
Schreibers' ranch, just a
fraction of the tens of
thousands in
the nation's second largest
natural gas field.
JANE SCHREIBER: We went to three
wells today. Every one of them
were either venting or leaking.
And those were, you know, less
than a mile from our house.
DON SCHREIBER: Well, there are
20,000 existing wells here now,
most of them acting just exactly
like the wells we saw today.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: The
Environmental Defense Fund has
spearheaded multiple studies on
methane
emissions. Its energy policy
manager says the problem is not
a tough one to solve.
JON GOLDSTEIN, Environmental
Defense Fund: Literally, the
problem is being looked at
by rocket scientists. But the
solutions are largely plumbing.
We are talking about fixing
pipes, stopping them from
leaking at natural gas
production sites, and that's
stuff that
we know how to do.
TOM MULLINS, CEO, Synergy
Operating, LLC: Anywhere that we
have methane usage, you would
be concerned if you have leaks.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Industry is
hunting and fixing methane
emissions, says Tom Mullins,
who owns part of an oil and gas
company in Farmington. We met on
the campus of San Juan
College's School of Energy,
which offers hands-on training.
TOM MULLINS: We have been
applying technology, you know,
identifying leaks that are out
there.
You know, we do that on a daily
basis, as all good industry
folks would do.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: For industry,
doing green is nice. Seeing
green is even better. Captured
methane can be sold, since it's
essentially natural gas. That's
good for companies and
taxpayers.
TOM MULLINS: We're in the
business of producing methane,
and we would like to get paid
for
it, and we would like the public
to get paid for their share of
that methane. Here in New
Mexico, the -- basically the
entire public school system,
both at K-12 and then the higher
educational system, is funded
from the revenues from oil and
gas royalties.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: The desire to
recoup emissions has sparked
technological innovations. Jason
Libersky's company, Quantigy
Engineering, designs compressors
that vacuum vapors off
storage tanks.
JASON LIBERSKY, CEO, Quantigy
Engineering: What we do now is
basically provide suction
to these tanks that just suck
off the gases that would be
normally be released to the
atmosphere.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: And so this
essentially is a vacuum cleaner?
JASON LIBERSKY: Exactly, a
high-dollar vacuum cleaner.
(LAUGHTER)
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: That vacuum
can cost upwards of $50,000.
Infrared cameras can be twice
that. Even this tiny control
valve has a stiff price tag for
small producers.
TOM MULLINS: The little item is
a $400 item, so you can see that
this items has -- there's
two of those on this particular
unit, so that's an $800 item.
Some of our marginal type wells
might not make $800
profit in a year.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Oil and gas
prices are low right now. But
natural gas production
in the U.S. is on the upswing,
and is expected to grow more
than 50 percent over the next
25 years. That means emissions
are likely to increase, too,
unless measures are taken
to reduce them.
Last year, Colorado, New
Mexico's neighbor to the north,
became the first state to clamp
down on methane emissions. Now
federal rules are in the works.
Proposed EPA standards,
when combined with other federal
actions, could cut emissions
from 2012 levels by 40
to 45 percent by the year 2025
and require semi-annual
inspections of production
facilities.
The Bureau of Land Management,
which oversees public lands,
mostly in the West, has drafted
a new rule aimed at reducing
wasteful flaring, venting and
leaking of natural gas. But the
details and timetable
aren't known yet.
Industry doesn't want
more regulation.
WALLY DRANGMEISTER: A good
example might be something like
the fact that they call for
using of infrared cameras many
times a year on every well.
Well, that's something that
could cause low-producing wells
that are late in their life to
just become uneconomical
and have to plugged.
Environmentalists say the EPA
proposals are a good start, but
don't go far enough.
BRUCE BAIZEL: It wouldn't cover
a well like this because it's --
this is an existing well.
It will only cover new wells.
But you have got to get some
kind of regulation in place
in the first instance, and I'm
real glad they're doing that.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Still, no
matter the method, cutting
methane emissions is a goal
shared
by industry, government
and environmentalists.
JON GOLDSTEIN: If you are
concerned about climate change,
it's important for those
reasons.
If you're concerned about waste
of a natural resource, it's
important for those reasons
as well. It's really
a win-win issue.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: I'm Kathleen
McCleery, for the "PBS NewsHour"
in New Mexico's San
Juan Basin.
GWEN IFILL: Now: the elusive
goal of peace in the Middle
East.
Two decades ago, there
was a moment of hope.
But, as chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret Warner
reports, the assassination
that shattered that momentum
still resonates today.
MARGARET WARNER: One hundred
thousand people swelled the
crowd at a Tel Aviv peace rally
200 years ago tonight, as Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin took the
microphone to speak.
YITZHAK RABIN, Israeli Prime
Minister (through translator):
We know how to make peace, and
not just sing about peace.
MARGARET WARNER: But minutes
later, he was fatally gunned
down by a 27-year-old Jewish
ultra-nationalist opposed to his
peace efforts with the
Palestinians.
Rabin was nearing the end of a
reelection campaign and pressing
forward with peace initiatives
on several fronts. He'd already
signed the historic Oslo accords
in Washington in 1993,
famously shaking hands with
Yasser Arafat, head the
Palestine Liberation
Organization,
or PLO.
For the first time, Israelis and
Palestinians agreed to
acknowledge each other's right
to
exist.
YITZHAK RABIN: We, who have
fought against you, the
Palestinians, we say to you
today,
in a loud and a clear voice,
enough of blood and tears,
enough.
(APPLAUSE)
MARGARET WARNER: A year later,
Rabin signed yet another
historic agreement, this one
with
King Hussein of Jordan, to
normalize relations between the
two countries. His actions
stirred
a fierce backlash from
right-wing Israelis and Jewish
settlers, who saw them as steps
toward forfeiting the
occupied territories.
The vilification of Rabin came
despite his war hero background;
27 years a soldier, he
began with an elite Jewish
strike force in the 1940s. And
after Israel's founding in
1948, he rose through the ranks
to become the military's chief
of staff.
Rabin went on to oversee
Israel's victory in the 1967
war, winning control of
Jerusalem,
the West Bank, and Gaza. As
defense minister in 1987, he put
down the first Palestinian
intifada, instructing his troops
to use -- quote -- "force,
power, and blows."
He was elected prime minister
twice, first in 1974 and then
again in 1992, campaigning
on the possibility of peace.
YITZHAK RABIN: I believe that
within six to nine months, it
will be possible to reach
an agreement with the
Palestinian delegation about
establishment of autonomy.
MARGARET WARNER: That vision was
praised at his funeral attended
by 80 heads of state,
including Egyptian President
Hosni Mubarak, President Bill
Clinton, and King Hussein of
Jordan.
HUSSEIN BIN TALAL, King of
Jordan: He had courage. He had
vision, and he had a commitment
to peace. And standing here, I
commit before you, before my
people in Jordan, before the
world, myself to continue to do
my utmost to ensure that we
leave a similar legacy.
MARGARET WARNER: But within six
months, right-wing party leader
Benjamin Netanyahu became prime
minister after campaigning on a
promise not to hand back
captured land to Arabs. He began
a second stint as prime
minister in 2009.
All post-Rabin efforts to forge
peace encouraged by the United
States have foundered. Last
weekend, Israelis marked the
assassination anniversary with a
memorial rally in what
is now Rabin Square in Tel Aviv.
Thousands attended, including
former Israeli President
Shimon Peres and former
President Clinton.
BILL CLINTON, Former President
of the United States: The next
step will be determined by
whether you decide that Yitzhak
Rabin was right, that you have
to share the future with
your neighbors, that you have to
give their children a chance,
too, that you have to stand
for peace, that the risks for
peace are not as severe as the
risk of walking away from
it.
MARGARET WARNER: But with a new
wave of Palestinian-Israeli
violence under way, it's not
clear that anyone
will take that risk
any time soon.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Margaret Warner.
GWEN IFILL: We look at Rabin's
legacy today two, decades later,
with Dennis Ross, a longtime
Middle East peace envoy, who
served in Republican and
Democratic administrations,
Daoud Kuttab,
a Palestinian journalist based
in Amman, Jordan, and Ari
Shavit, an Israeli columnist and
author.
Ari Shavit, 20 years later, do
you wonder whether things could
have been different had
Yitzhak Rabin not been killed?
ARI SHAVIT, Author, "My Promised
Land: The Triumph and Tragedy of
Israel": Yes, I think
there is a chance they would
have been different, but I think
that the romantic approach that
we would have had a perfect
ideal peace is somewhat flawed.
Let me say, first of all, as an
Israeli, that Rabin's murder is
a traumatic experience in
our nation's history. In the
way, it's a combination of the
murder of Abe Lincoln, John
Kennedy,
and Martin Luther King.
Rabin wasn't a saint. He wasn't
a sacred man. He had flaws. But
he had an amazing -- he
wasn't only courageous,
intelligent, and authentic
person, but he really tried to
end the conflict,
the tragedy of the conflict. And
he represented a benign, decent,
benevolent Israel, something
we all yearn for so much today.
GWEN IFILL: Daoud Kuttab, what
of that do you accept and what
do you reject?
DAOUD KUTTAB, Palestinian
Journalist: Mr. Rabin was -- as
Ari said, was no angel. He
was the person who spoke very
toughly and acted very toughly
against the Palestinian
intifada. He encouraged the
soldiers to break the arms of
stone throwers.
He was a very tough military
man, but he did see -- did
clearly make a conversion in his
last days, and he was really
interested in trying to find a
peaceful solution. And he
had that combination of a
security man that has been
converted and understood the
needs
for a political resolution
to the conflict.
In that sense, I think he was a
rare species that we do not see
in these days in the
negotiations
between Israelis
and Palestinians.
GWEN IFILL: Dennis Ross, you
wrote in an op-ed peace in The
Los Angeles Times that the last
thing that Dennis -- that, I
mean, Yitzhak Rabin said to you
was, "Dennis, expect anything."
Twenty years later, what did you
expect that was fulfilled and
what did you expect that
wasn't?
DENNIS ROSS, Former U.S. Envoy
to Middle East: Well, 20 years
ago, I didn't believe, A, that
he could be assassinated,
because I had a very hard time
fathoming that Yitzhak Rabin,
who was the embodiment of the
Israeli experience, who fought
his whole life for Israel, was
someone who could be
assassinated by an Israeli,
number one.
Number two, had I been able to
fathom that, I wouldn't have
believed that, 20 years from
that moment, we would be where
we are today. I would have
believed that, somehow, even
if we didn't have an agreement,
we would have found some kind of
greater basis for coexistence,
some kind of greater basis for
separation of these two peoples.
There are, after all, two
national movements competing for
the same space. And I suspect
that some kind of greater basis
of stability between the two --
to be fair, I also didn't
expect that we would be seeing
within the Middle East as a
whole a breakdown of the
state system, Arab states
themselves being really put at
risk.
The region as a whole is not
what I expected at that point,
certainly, when I was thinking
back 20 years ago.
GWEN IFILL: Ari Shavit, as you
look back and you look forward,
do you see -- do you think
that Israelis believe anymore,
just in general -- I know you
can't speak for everyone -- that
a two-state solution
is possible?
ARI SHAVIT: I think that most
Israelis still want a two-state
way. They want to move forward.
They want some sort of peace.
But they are traumatized by the
failures of all the previous
attempts to bring about a
comprehensive, complete,
idyllic, utopian peace. And in
this sense, the Rabin legacy,
so to speak, is really relevant,
because Rabin wasn't a utopian.
The fact that he was a general,
he was tough, he was a skeptic,
he was -- he didn't come with a
kind of Mother Teresa approach
to the conflict, that gave him a
lot of credibility within
Israel.
And I think that would have
given him the ability to deal
much better with the conflict.
And in a sense, what we need
today in Israel is a Rabin-like
of leadership, because the
right went -- became an extreme
right, and the left endured some
sort of romantic view
of peace, which most
Israelis do not buy.
GWEN IFILL: Daoud Kuttab, that's
a tall order that Ari Shavit
just laid out there.
From the Palestinian point of
view, where is the leadership
coming from, and does it
-- can it -- can it achieve what
we just heard outlined there, or
is that even something
you want?
DAOUD KUTTAB: My generation
might still be interested in a
two-state solution, but my
son and their generation,
they're not interested in
two-state solution.
They look at us as being stupid
and being fooled by the Israelis
who kept us going for
a long time, and at the same
time they were building Jewish
settlements. I mean, since
Rabin's death, we have had twice
or three times the size of the
Jewish settlements.
So they're saying there should
just be one state, and we should
find some kind of a solution
where there is equal rights for
everybody. So there is a big
problem right now among
Palestinians, in the fact that
they feel that the idea of
two-state solution was just a
farce, and that we were giving
too many opportunities for this
idea of peace talks, and they
went
nowhere. Yet we were losing
our land in the meanwhile.
GWEN IFILL: Dennis Ross, you
have been at more of these
negotiation tables than you
can probably count. Do you
harbor any hope or expectation
of interests converging? And
does the U.S. play a
role in that anymore?
DENNIS ROSS: I'm pessimistic in
the near term, because, in a
sense, what Daoud just described
as a reality on the Palestinian
side in some ways is mirrored by
the Israelis side, not
in the sense of wanting a
one-state outcome, but in the
level of disbelief that exists
on the part of both populations.
Israelis don't believe that the
Palestinians will ever accept a
two-state outcome that
accepts Israel as a state of the
Jewish people. Palestinians
don't believe that Israelis will
ever accept a genuinely
independent Palestinian state.
And the starting point has to be
change
the realities on the ground,
begin to restore a level of
belief on each side that shows
that a two-state outcome
actually could be possible.
I think the U.S. can play a
role, but I also think one of
the things that's going to have
to change, given the weakness
and dysfunction on the
Palestinian side, I think that
the
Arab states are going to have to
play a different kind of role.
They're going to have to play
a role where they provide a kind
of cover for Palestinians to be
able to make adjustments
or compromises, and they also
provide a response to the
Israelis, where the Israelis
feel,
if they make basic compromises
or concessions towards the
Palestinians, the reciprocation
will come as much, if not more,
from the Arabs than it will come
from the Palestinians.
It's a tall order, and,
basically, I don't think many in
the region right now are looking
at the U.S. administration to be
able to manage something like
that.
GWEN IFILL: Dennis Ross, Daoud
Kuttab, and Ari Shavit, thank
you all for sharing with
us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Maybe
you can go home again.
Actor Jeff Daniels did it, and
even built his own professional
theater company.
Jeffrey Brown visited Daniels
in his Michigan hometown.
ACTRESS: He's going to insist
that, if you want the part, you
either audition together
or go home.
JEFFREY BROWN: In the new play
"Casting Session," two actors
vying for the same role,
desperate
for any role, await
their auditions.
The playwright is Hollywood and
Broadway actor Jeff Daniels,
who's known both the highs and
lows of his profession.
JEFF DANIELS, Actor/Playwright:
I have been in this waiting room
where you're just trying
to get the next gig, the next
job that pays $125 a week, and
maybe someone will come and
see it and maybe get you a
better job, but got to get this
one.
JEFFREY BROWN: That was you?
JEFF DANIELS: Oh, God,
that was me for years.
The board believes you're no
longer necessary to this
company.
JEFFREY BROWN: At 60, Daniels is
seemingly everywhere now, with
major roles in two big
new movies, "Steve Jobs."
JEFF DANIELS: He's going to
starve to death long before we
can help.
JEFFREY BROWN: And
"The Martian."
JEFF DANIELS: Good
evening. I'm Will McAvoy.
JEFFREY BROWN: He won an Emmy
two years ago for his starring
role as a television news
anchor on HBO's "The Newsroom."
JEFF DANIELS: You have
been faking for 20 years?
JEFFREY BROWN: And last year, he
reprised his role in the lowbrow
comedy "Dumb and Dumber
To."
JEFF DANIELS: Awesome!
If you're going to live in
Michigan in the middle of a
movie career and try to sustain
it, my theory was, you
better have range.
JEFFREY BROWN: You went
to Central Michigan?
Early in his career, Daniels and
his wife, Kathleen, made a
decision about how they would
live their lives.
JEFF DANIELS: I knew it was a
risk. And I had come back for
three summers.
JEFFREY BROWN: A risk because
you're kind of leaving behind...
JEFF DANIELS: Why aren't you
moving to L.A.? What do you
mean? You're an actor.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. I mean,
you're an actor, right? You got
to be in New York or you got
to be in L.A.
JEFF DANIELS: Yes. What do you
mean you're going to Michigan?
Why?
Well, it's home.
JEFFREY BROWN: Daniels had grown
up in the small rural town of
Chelsea, Michigan, about
an hour west of Detroit. Its
major claim to fame, as home to
Jiffy mix muffins.
A teacher encouraged Daniels to
act in high school plays. He
left college when he was
accepted into an important
apprenticeship program at the
Circle Rep Theatre in New York,
renowned for fostering acting
talent and showcasing new
American plays.
JEFF DANIELS: I got
to speak to you.
ACTRESS: You mean me?
JEFFREY BROWN: He had some
success in films, including, at
age 30, in woody Allen's "Purple
Rose of Cairo."
But, Daniels says:
JEFF DANIELS: I didn't trust it.
I never trusted it. I still
don't.
JEFFREY BROWN: Meaning
what? Trust...
JEFF DANIELS: Meaning, you're
absolutely brilliant, you're
brilliant. Oh, my God, you have
changed
the way that actors should
act. And you start to go...
JEFFREY BROWN: People said that?
JEFF DANIELS: Well, they -- but
that -- there's no -- the
extremes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right,
of course, yes.
JEFF DANIELS: The extreme, not
only the highs, but the --
you're over, your career is
over.
There's no consistency
there. This is consistent.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
This is the life Daniels created
by returning home to Chelsea,
raising three children here,
and 25 years ago, building his
own purple rose, the Purple Rose
Theatre.
JEFF DANIELS: Initially, there
were a lot of people going, you
know, your theater won't
work. It just won't work.
Nobody's going to come.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because it can't
work in a place like this.
JEFF DANIELS: It can't work.
And it's just -- forget it.
JEFFREY BROWN: He renovated an
old garage that his grandfather
had once owned, and was
later used for school buses.
JEFF DANIELS: Wally
Grossman's (ph) bus garage.
JEFFREY BROWN: Wally Grossman.
JEFF DANIELS: I remember Wally
when I was in school here. And
he would -- he was head
of the bus drivers.
GUY SANVILLE, Artistic Director,
Purple Rose Theatre: Across from
you is someone that hurt
you very badly. You have
got to forgive them.
JEFFREY BROWN: Daniels built his
own company of actors and
technicians from nearby
communities,
and created a year-long
apprenticeship program to train
young people.
Guy Sanville, the artistic
director here for 20 years, is
another Michigan native who left
for New York and came back.
GUY SANVILLE: New York is a
great place. But we wanted to
raise our families here. We
wanted
to be able to put our kids on
the bus in the morning when they
go to school. And it's just
-- it's a little slower pace,
and -- but just as rich, I
think.
JEFFREY BROWN: All fine, but to
survive, Purple Rose had to
build an audience in a small
town
with no professional theaters
and little cultural life.
JEFF DANIELS: You have to create
that. You have to get them to
not just go to the plays
that have a happy ending. Is it
a comedy? OK, it's not a comedy.
When's the next comedy?
All right, I will come to that.
And you have to get those people
to take a chance once
in awhile.
JEFFREY BROWN: And
how'd you do that?
JEFF DANIELS: With comedy.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFF DANIELS: You got to get
them in the building. It's still
a sale. Art out here is more
often
than not a guy who
lives north of town.
JEFFREY BROWN: But
then what happens?
JEFF DANIELS: Then they go to
see Tennessee Williams and they
-- they get their ears pinned
back.
JEFFREY BROWN: It hasn't been
easy, but 25 years later, Purple
Rose is still here, a
creative and economic
engine in the town.
GUY SANVILLE: They used to roll
up the sidewalks at 6:00 on a
Saturday night. Well, now it's
booming. And it's not just the
theater, but the theater has
been a great draw. It's a
town of 5,000 people and we
draw 40,000 people a year.
ACTRESS: It's the
role of a lifetime.
JEFFREY BROWN: The theater
commissions new plays from
contemporary writers, and
Daniels
has made himself a playwright.
"Casting session" is his 16th
play written for Purple Rose.
JEFF DANIELS: You have got a
slide thing on it. Don't --
let's keep that.
JEFFREY BROWN: He's also
developed another
Michigan-centered piece of his
artistic life,
as a musician and part
of a traveling band.
It's a family affair, including
his two sons, Ben, a guitarist,
and Luke, who serves as
manager. We watched the band
rehearse in a newly-built studio
on what Daniels jokingly
calls the family compound.
The next day, some 150 miles
away in Three Oaks, Michigan,
they performed at the Acorn
Theater, the first gig in a
month-long road tour west and
back, mostly playing in smaller
cities and towns.
Acting in major films, writing
plays, founding his own theater
company, and on the road playing
music, it began with one big
decision made early on to move
back home. But nothing about
this life, says Daniels, was
the slightest bit inevitable.
JEFF DANIELS: I remember saying
goodbye to my dad across the
lake. And I remember driving
down the road, tears in my eyes,
because you're 21, you're from a
small town. Nobody is an
actor from this town.
And I wish I could jump in that
car and tell that 21-year-old,
look, you're going to have
some success. It's going to be
great. You're going to learn a
lot. Really not going to
happen until your late 50s. So
just hang in there. Hang in
there.
JEFFREY BROWN: For about
35, 40 years, right?
JEFF DANIELS: Yes. And just
be patient. Be patient.
JEFFREY BROWN: Hang in there and
maybe succeed on your own terms.
From Chelsea, Michigan, I'm
Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: Online, you can
watch Jeff Daniels and his band
perform an original song,
"Wicked
World." That's at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Also on the "NewsHour" online
right now, here's another thing
to shop for this holiday season:
a new Medicare drug plan. As
prescription premiums rise, you
can use the open enrollment
period to find the best option
for you. Learn how from our
Medicare expert on Making Sense.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And tune in
tonight on "NOVA" on PBS, the
first of a three-part series on
the geological forces that
shaped our continent. Hosted by
Kirk Johnson, the director of
the
Smithsonian's National Museum of
Natural History, "Making North
America" takes a road trip
through
our tumultuous
geological evolution.
NARRATOR: The landscape is
breathtaking and so much more.
KIRK JOHNSON, National Museum of
Natural History: As a geologist,
the Grand Canyon is perhaps
the best place in the world.
It's this incredible
300-mile-long slice through the
Earth, and
you can see layer after layer
after layer after layer of
sedimentary rock.
NARRATOR: Each layer is a time
capsule with a slice of our
continent's epic history locked
inside.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's
tonight's "NOVA."
Also on PBS, Charlie Rose sits
down with Francis Collins of the
National Institutes of Health
to talk precision medicine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.